+++
title = "Character Generation"
date = 2018-02-08T12:14:18-05:00
draft = true
image = "img/"
artist = ""
artist_link = ""
type = "post"
tags = [
    "character generation",
 ]
+++

Here's a step by step guide (with page numbers!) to building a character in 5th
Edition D&D.  Note that this order is slightly different from the order in the
Player's Handbook and Basic Rules, because I think this order is more intuitive,
especially if you're new to the process.  Page numbers are given for the
[Player's
Handbook](https://www.amazon.com/Players-Handbook-Dungeons-Dragons-Wizards/dp/0786965606)
(PHB) and [Basic Rules
pdf](http://media.wizards.com/2016/downloads/DND/PlayerBasicRulesV03.pdf) (BR).

## Step 0 - Figure out how ability scores are generated

Where you start will depend on how you are generating your ability scores (if
you're not sure, ask your DM first!).  The various methods of determining
ability scores are detailed near the beginning of the rules books (PHB 12, BR 7)
(or whatever your DM's custom method is).  

Because ability scores affect so much of your character, the exact character you
want to play may change depending on what stats you get.  If you are rolling
dice to generate your ability scores, skip to step 3 and generated them first,
then come back to step 1.  If you are using point buy or a standard array of
stats, go ahead and choose your race and class first, since you know what kind
of ability score you'll get.

## Step 1 - Choose a class

Your class determines most of the abilities your character gets.  You can choose
levels in different classes later, but you will not get all the advantages of
the later class (notably, you do not get the later class' saving throw
proficiencies, and usually get reduced access to armor and weapons).  

## Step 3 - Generate ability scores

The various methods of determining ability scores are at (PHB 12, BR 7) (or
whatever your DM's custom method is). Follow the rules given by your DM / in the
handbook.  



