+++
title = "Months"
date = 2018-01-24T21:37:48-05:00
draft = false
image = "img/months.jpg"
type = "post"
tags = [
    "worldbuilding",
    "naming",
]
+++


I wanted a custom calendar for my campaign world, to keep it feeling authentic
and like it existed before the characters started wandering around in it.
However, I didn't want the players to have to look up all my random month names
every time I used them. What's the solution? Well, at first I thought I'd just
make up names that basically start the same as the existing months (luckily the
month names in english are all pretty unique)... but I'm honestly terrible at
coming up with names on my own. Suddenly it occurred to me - foreign languages!
There's a great [list of
months](https://www.omniglot.com/language/time/months.htm) in many different
languages that I just cherry picked from. Azerbaijani had some nice-sounding
variants. Thus, if I say that a certain thing happened in Djulete ... you
probably can figure out that corresponds to July, and thus mid-summer (sorry,
southern hemisphere folks, all my players are in the northern hemisphere).

I started to do the same for days of the week, but I realized that I really
don't have any use for the days of the week in the campaign. It's not like
people work a 40 hour work week. There's no "weekend". You'd never say "next
Monday", you'd say "5 days from now". So... I just cut them. Less to worry
about.

Here's my months:

* Yanvar
* Fevral
* Mart
* Avrel
* Mei
* Djun
* Djulete
* Avgost
* Sentyabr
* Oktyabr
* Noyabr
* Dekabr

I actually kind of like that they come from different languages. That is very
similar to our own months. Clearly the -uary's and the -ember's were added to
the calendar at different times, and thus have different sounding names.

So, when you're looking for names, try going to google translate or a
compilation page of languages and then just steal stuff shamelessly.  I think
you'll get more interesting and recognizable names than using one of those name
generators that spits out names that you can't pronounce and can't remember.